Exam 3 notes 

Motivation – Hunger and Sex


Motivation – Process that influences the direction, persistence and strength of a goal directed behavior.

Where do motivations come from? 

1. Drive Reduction Theory – physiological need creates a state of internal tension or arousal (drive) that motivates an organism to behave in such a way to reduce this tension.

	We are “pushed” by physiological need to reduce drives.
	We are “pulled” by incentives to reduce drives.

	Incentives: stimuli that “pull” an organism toward a goal. 
Extrinsic – something is done in order to receive external reward or to avoid punishment
 Intrinsic – something is done for its own sake

2. Psychodynamic View – unconscious motives affect our behavior – (This is a Freudian theory, and Freud himself emphasized sexual and aggressive motives).

3. Humanistic Views – (Abraham Maslow) also took into account striving for personal growth 
(SELF ACTUALIZATION)
	Maslow’s hierarchy of needs:
Deficiency needs – physiological needs (food, drink); safety needs (security, psychological safety); belongingness and love needs (affiliation, acceptance, affection); esteem needs (approval, recognition)
growth needs – cognitive needs (knowledge, understanding); aesthetic needs (beauty, symmetry); self actualization. 

Hunger
Physiological motivations: Glucose level changes, signal is sent to the brain to regulate hunger – meal starts; After eating, leptin (a hormone), secreted by fat cells, signals the brain to decrease appetite and increase energy expenditure – meal stops. 

What parts of the brain are involved in this process? 1. Lateral hypothalamus, 2. Ventromedial hypothalamus, 3. Paraventricular nucleus, and the 4. pituitary gland. 

Psychological motivations: 
Conditioning – good taste and smell of food positively reinforces eating; hunger reduction (feeling of being full) negatively reinforces eating.
Memory – memory of how much and when we last ate.
Cultural motivations: factors such as availability of food, the taste of food, variety of food, and cultural norms around eating and food influence the experience of hunger.

Body Image – Eating Disorders
Anorexia: severe restriction of food intake and fear of being fat
	Symptoms: menstruation stops, hair loss, bone loss, etc.
Bulimia: binge eating and then purging food; also afraid of being fat.
	Symptoms: 

Causes of anorexia and bulimia 
Cultural norms, genetic predisposition; abnormal activity of serotonin and leptin (not clear whether this is a cause or an effect though); personality and upbringing 
Anorexia (some specific causes) – perfectionism, need for control, disapproving parents with high achievement standards for children. 
Bulimia (some specific causes) – depression and anxiety, low impulse control, lack of a stable sense of personal identity 

Sex
Physiologically based motive but strongly influenced by learning and values.

Physiological motivations: Sex hormones (estrogen, testosterone)
Psychological motivations: Psychological stimulation – desire, fantasies (positive influences); stress, fatigue, anger, performance anxiety (negative influences).
Cultural motivations: social norms and cultural context influence meaning of sex and set limits on acceptable/unacceptable behaviors and practices.


How does pornography influence sexual behavior?

Social Learning Theory – watching a pornographic video may make one more likely to then engage in that behavior because we learn from observation. 

Catharsis Principle – watching an aggressive porn video can satisfy the urge for sexual aggression and would, therefore, lead to a decreases likelihood of engaging in aggressive behavior.


Controlled experimental studies show that aggression in males toward women was increases after they viewed violent pornography. 

Sexual orientation – one’s emotional and erotic preference for partners of a particular sex
Unidimensional view – exclusively hetero or exclusively homosexual 
Multidimensional view – orientation refers to self-identity, sexual attraction, and actual sexual behavior.
Determinants of sexual orientation -  genetic factors, as well as environmental, psychological and other biological causes (still debated) 

Desire to Affiliate 
Evolutionary advantageous – we have evolved as social creatures because it has had adaptive advantages over the course of evolution. Some of these advantages include: 
Greater access to sexual mates
More protection from predators 
Efficient division of labor
Development of culture and passing of knowledge 
4 reasons for why we affiliate: 
obtain positive stimulation
receive emotional support
gain attention
permit social comparison
Seeking a mate – how do we go about doing that?
Sexual strategies theory – there are sex differences in seeking a mate: men place more value on looks and domestic skills; women place more value on earnings, potential, status, and ambition. These differences reflect inherited tendencies.
Social Structure Theory – there are sex difference in seeking a mate, but they arise from different social roles directed at the different sexes by society; women have less power and access to resources and seek these in their mate.



Development across the Lifespan

4 major issues in Devp. Psych.:
1. Nature v. Nurture
2. Critical v. Sensitive periods
3. Stages and continuity of development
4. Stability v. change in characteristics over lifespan

Cognitive Development:
Piaget:
Schemas - 
Assimilation – 
Accomodation – 

Piaget’s 4 stages:
Sensorimotor 0 – 2 years
Preoperational 2-6 years
Concrete operational 6-12 years
Formal Operations 12+
Know characteristics and developmental milestones of each.

Social Development:
Attachment – 

Erikson – Social Development
8 stages – know each one and be able to recognize an example of each.

Adulthood
2 main issues;
Intimacy v. isolation and Generativity v. stagnation


Personality
Psychoanalytic approach (Freud):
Psychoanalysis: Diagnosis and therapy
Uses: Free association, Dream analysis, and Hypnosis

Mind: Conscious, Preconscious, Unconscious – know each

3 separate but interacting personality structures: know each
Id – 
Ego- 
Superego –

Defense Mechanisms:
Know all 8 and be able to recognize examples of each.
5 stages of Psychosexual development: know each
Oral-
Anal-
Phallic-
Latent-
Genital-

Trait Perspective:
Gordon Allport
Big 5 – Openness
	Conscientiousness
	Extraversion
	Agreeableness
	Neuroticism

 3 factors that make it difficult to predict behaviors based on personality traits:
__
__
__

Self monitoring:
High v. low self monitors – 

Biological Approach to Personality:
Hans Eyesenck
2 supertraits:
Extraversion – introversion
Emotional Stability v. Instability
Link to arousal levels in the brain for each trait? – 
Link to approach – avoidance dimension? – 

Humanist Approach
Carl Rogers and Abraham Maslow
Self – 
Self concept-
Self consistency- 
Congruence –

Unconditional Positive Regard: acceptance, sympathy, love from others
Positive self regard

Social Cognitive Theories
Julian Rotter – 
Locus of Control : internal or external : know characteristics of each

Albert Bandura – 
Self efficacy ; 4 factors that contribute:
Previous Performance Experiences
Observational Learning
Verbal Persuasion
Emotional Arousal
Psychological Disorders

Demonological model 
Disease Model
Psychoanalytic model
Vulnerability Stress Model

Abnormal Behavior classified through 3 Ds:
Distressful – 
Dysfunctional –
Deviant – 

Disorders: Know symptoms of each and prevalence (that we have discussed in class) 
	     Know potential explanations i.e. biological (evidence), behavioral, psychoanalytic

Anxiety Disorders:
Generalized Anxiety Disorder
Panic Disorder
Phobias
Obsessive Compulsive Disorder

Somatoform Disorders:
Hypochondriasis
Conversion disorder
Malingering
Munchausen’s Syndrome

Dissociative Disorders:’Psychogenic Amnesia
Psychogenic Fugue
Dissociative Identity Disorder

Mood Disorders:
Dysthymia
Major Depression
Bipolar Disorder (manic-depression)

Schizophrenia: 4 subtypes
Paranoid
Disorganized
Catatonic
Undifferentiated (hebephrenic)

Positive and negative symptoms

Delusions and Hallucinations

Personality Disorders:
Narcisstic
Histrionic
Antisocial
Borderline