									        700 Commonwealth Ave
Boston, Massachusetts,  02215

April 24th, 2015

Cambridge College
Summer Institutes Residency program
1000 Massachusetts Avenue,
Cambridge MA 02138

I am writing to express my interest in applying for Resident Assistant || at Cambridge College, as part of the Summer Institutes residency program. Currently, I am an undergraduate at Boston University. 

I believe that I possess the required experience and educational background, to succeed as a Resident Assistant this summer. Below, I’ve highlighted some experiences which I feel are compatible with your program. 

Teaching Experience: I have worked with three different organizations involved primarily in teaching underprivileged youth. I worked with a group of students who were very diverse both culturally and linguistically. Currently, I am volunteering with the Let’s Get Ready as a Math Tutor and Mentor as part of their college readiness program.

Ambassador InsightSTEM: I am currently serving as the lead campus Ambassador for InsightSTEM at Boston University. I organize events on campus, direct student efforts, and manage InsightSTEM’s community building programs on campus. 

Mentoring Experience: I am volunteering with Global Civics, a part of the Boston University International Affairs Association, at New Mission Highschool in Boston. I work very closely with highschool seniors and juniors regarding their senior projects. 

I look forward to the opportunity to speak with you further about the Resident Assistant position.  If I can provide any further information, I can be reached at dshehzad@bu.edu. Thank you for your consideration I look forward to hearing from your office. 

Best, 
Dawood Shehzad
CAS’18 ENG’19

I am interested in being a Program assistant because I believe I have been through all the possible “phases”. I went from being extremely ecstatic about starting college in the US, to being disappointed in what I found, to taking a complete turn and realizing that there is much more that Boston University offers and that all I need to do is take the initiative, put more faith in people and realize that my friends do not always have to be people with whom I expect to remain in contact with throughout life. 

I feel that because I’ve been 

These past few months at Boston University, I have gotten more involved in the community around me, be it teaching rising juniors and seniors in high schools near Boston University or taking part in interesting discussions with my friends in the Boston University International Affairs Association. I

 My friend for a moment could just as well be that individual I sit down with in the GSU food court or the person handing out flyers on Comm Ave—even if our friendship is only for a couple of minutes. I aspire to be a SAR so that I may help new terriers through their own respective “phases” and help them deal with college when it hits them in full force. I want to show them that they can find exactly what they are looking for at BU and help them transition through their "phases".
